Something that I would like to know, and I would think it would be interesting if you could find out for the purpose, is who told Jack Williams that he would not teach a history class at A&M after he was no longer chancellor?
I don't have any idea.
I don't know.
Because I think he did want to.
Oh, I know he wanted to.
That I know, both simply because
was over at former students for coffee.
He was over there.
He gets a phone call and it was Keith Bryant calling him, asking him about textbook or something.
And he was so excited talking to Keith on the telephone right there while we were sitting around trying to have coffee about what he's gonna do in the class and he's planning and textbooks and all this sort of stuff.
And I also know for a fact that although most people on campus thought that word came down through Prescott that he wasn't going to teach, but Mack was shocked when Keith called to tell him.
Because as dean of faculties, it was a shock to me.
Yeah.
It certainly didn't go through normal channels.
Through normal channels.
Somebody called him.
And he's the one who called Keith.
And I've always wondered who it was.
Yeah.
Bob Cherry was the most likely suspect, but I'm not sure he would have taken it seriously had he been Cherry.
Yeah, I don't know.
I don't know.
Let's see.
Back to admissions and records, was there any regent or alum, former student, that was most active in speaking up for special admits?
Not that I recall.
And we're talking about a dozen or so a semester, or are we talking about dozens?
If you're talking about September, you're talking about dozens.
Dozens, okay.
Now.
And it was normally entering students, freshmen?
Yeah, occasionally transfer.
Almost never graduate.
And to be admitted to the College of Veterinary Medicine,
everybody pretty well backed off and realized that they couldn't.
I'm assuming that Cooper included the Oscar Wyatt story.
Yes, yes.
Okay.
I was in Williams' office when one of those phone calls came, so I heard that, and I heard Oscar Wyatt cuss Dr. Williams and use some very strong language and tell him, I'm going to get you.
The person that he wanted, Mr. Wyatt wanted admitted was his secretary's son or nephew or something rather.
And as I recall Dr. Williams having the paper before him, the young man was nowhere, nowhere, nowhere close.
Some years or several years after that, and Mr. White did the classic taking off my ring, take me off the list, you know, statement.
I was in a staff meeting for Cooper and Bill Lay was late.
And he came in apologizing to me.
He said, I had some guy named White on the phone and I couldn't get off the phone with him trying to get some Italian kids admitted.
And just to make, say something smarter, like I said, as in Oscar, I mean, I said, as in Wyatt Earp.
He said, no, no, Wyatt was his last name.
I said, as in Oscar Wyatt?
Yeah, yeah, that was his name.
Well, Cooper turns pale.
Bill didn't know who the guy is.
He didn't have a clue who he was.
Cooper turns pale, and he says, are you sure it was Oscar?
He said, yeah, he's trying to get these Italian kids admitted.
People that work for their parents are going to show up next week, and he wants us to admit them.
And he said, if everything's on the level, they can be admitted.
And everything was.
I mean, we had these three Italian kids.
Oh, so it worked okay.
It worked fine.
These three Italian kids, this was in a time when young people were being kidnapped in Italy.
And these were from the Fiat family.
And they were trying to get them in a nice, safe place, and one of them wanted to study agronomy, so they sent them to A&M.
Did you ever hear any anecdotes about someone offering money to get somebody admitted?
No.
I never did hear any of that.
Did you ever hear of the governor calling?
I never heard that.
Or someone from the governor's office?
Not that I remember, no.
It was usually state senators and state representatives they called.
And particularly Aggies who were state representatives.
Yes.
I don't remember anybody from the Association of Former Student Staff doing anything other than conveying the message.
I don't remember any of them ever trying to intervene.
No.
All right, and how would you describe the relationship of the former student office and its leadership to the university?
Then or now?
Then.
It was a very close relationship.
I adored Buckwires.
He was squirrely as he could be, and yet he ran a very good program somehow.
Buck, even though he worked for the association, saw himself more as a, more connected to the university.
Randy does too, but Randy fully gives evidence of showing that he works for the association more.
It's just an attitude.
I consider Randy Mattson a close friend, and I'm very, very fond of him.
I think he's got one of the world's toughest jobs.
Oh, I do, too.
And he's one I admire him as much as anybody I've ever known, because I met him the day he came as a prospective student when John Lindsay and Jack Knox brought him.
I'll tell you a funny story that can be told on here.
Okay.
The day after Buck Wires was fired, the morning after, his counterpart at the University of Texas at Austin, Roy Vaughn,
called Olive DeLucia.
And when Olive picked up the phone, without saying, hi, Olive, this is Roy, he growled, did Randy get Buck's job?
In other words, did he stab Buck?
And Olive's response was, Roy, Randy saved Buck's ass.
Then he said, oh, okay.
Let's see, you were in the Registrar's Office of Admissions and Records how long?
Until 78.
78.
So that's how many years?
Five.
And then?
Went to work in the Vice President for Academic Affairs Office.
Okay.
And with, let's see, we were in the Koch building then.
And what was your duties there?
Whatever I was told.
Or what did that end up being primarily?
Writing letters and reports and troubleshooting and whatever, and drafting and editing stuff, and just whatever needed to be done.
I had the job for two weeks before I knew what I was going to get paid, but I did negotiate a parking place in the lot next to the building before I took it.
The interesting thing to me about that job was when I left it,
Probably eight or ten faculty members either called or came to see me wanting to apply for the job.
And I kept telling them, you don't know what I do.
And you don't want the pay cut.
No way you want to work for what I've been making.
And, oh well, we'll do something about that.
And I said, I don't think you want to do what I've been doing.
So you reported to Mack Prescott, Vice President Prescott, because we didn't call it Provost then.
No.
And there was McCandless.
And he was already there, wasn't he?
Well, he was across the – no, he was director of institutional planning and analysis.
Oh, he was still that.
Okay.
Yeah.
All right.
And I was dean of faculties.
And who else was there that was reporting directly to Mac?
Well, all the deans, of course, and assorted directors of different things.
Right.
There wasn't anybody else in the Cochrane.
Jeanette.
And Jeanette Ferris.
Yeah.
Describe Jeanette's style of keeping all the office going.
Jeanette does a very good job, ain't she?
will work incredibly hard, incredibly long hours.
She can get awfully excited about things.
Jeanette thinks everything's a crisis.
Everything is an emergency, which is probably good in that job.
She gets along well with the people who work for her.
She has worked for a succession of vice presidents for academic affairs.
Eventually she pretty well gets them all straightened out.
Did Mack give you any steering directions when you first joined his group?
No.
Just that he needed some help.
And you were a new – you didn't replace anybody.
You were a new – that's what I thought.
Yeah.
Describe President Miller's staff.
President Miller had a secretary and an undersecretary, so to speak, and two assistants, Steve Pringle and Glenn Daly.
And how were their duties divided?
Glenn took care of things that were important, and Steve took care of everything else.
No, that's not quite true.
That's not quite true.
Steve worked more external types of things, and I've never seen anyone who could get in more messes than he could, could make people angrier than he could, and yet I always got along fine with him.
I had no problems at all working with him.
Let's see, had Emory Ballard already resigned when you got over there?
He resigns in the middle of the fall.
I think so.
I think I came in January, February.
Okay, all right.
As far as you were aware, important decisions under the Miller presidency were made how?
Who were the people that most were key to the way things were decided?
I think Dr. Miller didn't really trust an awful lot of people.
He did trust Prescott and Howard Vestal.
I think he got to where he did, but I don't think he started out that way.
He didn't think CODIS frequently was firm enough on things.
I have known members of Dr. Miller's family all of my life.
My father knew previous generations.
My dad always said the Millers are awfully good people, but they're different.
And they are.
Dr. Miller saw things, saw people as very, he either really, really liked you, in which case he'd do anything in the world for you, or he really, really didn't like you, in which case he would go out of his way to hurt you.
And if he didn't know you very well, he would give you the benefit of the doubt, but eventually you were going to fall in one of those camps as he got to know you.
Were you aware of any of the disagreements between Hubert as chancellor and Miller as president?
Mm-hmm.
And to me, see, I had taken a course under Hubert.
And essentially, the administration of higher education
And I also remember the day Hubert was named.
I was in Austin that day with George Kunze at the coordinating board.
And Kunze gets a call from his office, and they're calling to tell him that Hubert's just been named chancellor.
We get back to the Koch building.
Dr. Miller is the happiest man there.
He is thrilled.
He thinks it's the neatest thing in the world.
And I'm thinking,
You don't know Frank Hubert as well as I do.
He means to be boss, if that's his title.
And it was inevitable.
I mean, it was just inevitable.
I feel certain that Hubert had not had a great deal of respect for him for some time.
And as far as I know, almost from the first moment, the argument centered on where the services and the stations reported.
And I and the vice presidents two or three times in the late afternoon after everybody else was gone and talking to President Miller, we would say, look, Hubert's going to retire in three or four years.
And if you play your cards right, you'll end up there.
And when you were director of the experiment station, you didn't want to report to the president.
And my recollection is that late in that spring of 1980, he agreed that, yes, he ought to back off and leave it be.
I don't think that was the real issue.
What else was?
Oh, no.
If it hadn't been that, it would have been something else.
Oh, I agree with you.
Let me put it that way.
That was a real issue, but there would have been another one.
No, I agree.
I agree.
I think that was the fuse of... You were one of them, but it was my impression that there wasn't a great deal of respect for Miller among the deans.
They knew he was president, they respected that, but they didn't think he really understood how things worked.
As far as you know,
academic matters he listened to Prescott, and business matters he listened to Vestal.
Let's talk about this man Vestal a bit, because I've got to go interview him.
What kind of style did he give you, his operating style and manner?
Well Howard Vestal was one of the colonels who came here.
Rutter hired a lot of colonels because he figured they were intelligent and they'd work cheap because they already had an outside income.
But Vestal was one of the smart ones.
No one ever called him Colonel Vestal, except joking.
He was extremely capable, had a
a leadership, whatever there was about Howard Vestal, I knew immediately when I had passed the test, I didn't know what the test was, but I knew I'd passed it, and I was very pleased to have passed it.
Does that make any sense?
He called to warn me about something, a mistake he thought I had made.
And I told him, I said, Mr. Vestal, I didn't do that.
And he was giving me a chance to correct it.
I said, I didn't do that and told him who had done it.
And he said, in that case, I won't lift a finger to help.
And so I knew I'd passed it.
He was trying to keep me out of trouble, you know.
And I was very, very pleased.
And I don't know, how would you describe someone that I didn't, I never worked for him.
But I had an awful lot of respect for him, and I think people did.
Again, he got mad for the right reasons.
He did things for the right reasons.
And I got the impression from him, well, in fact, from Coldis, too, but from Vestal, Prescott, and Coldis, you don't need a big committee, you don't need a long time,
here's the material, let's study it, let's come to a conclusion, and let's go.
Vestal had another trait that you don't often or you don't always see in people who handle the money.
He knew what we were here for, and it wasn't to count money.
We were here to educate kids.
And that came through time and again, time and again.
And I can't cite specific instances, but, you know, that was his attitude.
And I say that's not always as much as I liked and respected Tom Cherry.
I'm not sure that Mr. Cherry had it to that much of extent.
And I'm not at all sure that we do now.
All right.
As we're heading toward the spring of 1980,
Were you at the commencement on Saturday in the spring of 1980 when the president of the Texas A&M did not shake hands with the last degree recipient?
No.
Mercifully.
Okay.
I was.
I have made so many commencement ceremonies, probably Cooper and Carter are the only two people who have been to more of them, but I didn't go to that one.
Right.
What did you hear, as you understood it, what happened?
As I understood it, what happened is the President handed her a diploma, and when she stuck out her hand to shake it, he turned his back.
I'm sitting on the front row next to Bill Hobby, because he had motioned for me to come up and sit next to him.
Was he still awake?
Oh, and we'd had a real good conversation, and he had said, when you get out to UTEP, I've known you for 20 years, stay in contact.
Maybe I can help you with some special items.
and we're chatting and then I said well gee it's about time now when we don't have many more to go I'm going to move back to my real seat on the back row and all at once I hear hissing.
And I said oh my goodness.
He said what's that?
And I said well particularly the corps members are hissing.
There's something they don't like.
What is it?
And then I saw Melanie Zentgraf coming up
on the right.
I learned later that her family thought that we had deliberately scheduled it where that she would be the last degree recipient at the last of the three commencements that spring.
Well, I was the one who was to work with Ed Cooper to decide which schools and colleges were on which of the three times, and we always tried to rotate it.
But since she was biomedical science in veterinary medicine undergraduate,
And her name began with a Z.
A Z.
And Lieutenant Governor Hobby then, when I mentioned her name, he said, oh my goodness, she's been a pain in my rear.
She's given me all kinds of trouble.
She's pestered us in Austin.
Gee my knee, I wish I wasn't sitting here.
And as I recall it, when Dr. Miller handed
By being the last one, everybody has kind of cleared the, looking up there, okay, the last one will all come.
Wake up.
Right.
He handed her the diploma tube.
She took it, not with her left hand, as would be normal, with her right, then shifted it to her left hand, put her hand back out, and as I recall, he said very lowly, no way I'm going to shake your hand.
Many people kind of took a deep breath.
She turned to Bob Lacey.
and put out her hand and he said, ma'am I'm not involved in this argument.
Don Carter said, would you please keep the line moving as was his norm.
And when we get into the letterman's lounge afterward to take off our caps and gowns,
That was a topic of conversation and I heard a number of board members particularly say serves her right to heck with her or worse than that.
I wouldn't have shaken her hands either and nobody ought to shake her hand.
All right.
Were you aware, did you hear any rumors about the board doing anything prior to their termination of Dr. Miller?
I wasn't either.
And that happened the week that we left to move to El Paso.
And the first morning we were there, I'm awakened by reporters.
Mac had called me late the night before and left a message, but we didn't get the message until three hours later, and by then it was 1130 Central Time.
Tell us a machine a minute.
Obviously some of the Hubert stuff, there's some other things that you're not ever gonna get in here.
Oh, I agree, I agree.
Okay.
And let's see, we were moving toward when Dr. Miller was terminated by the Bulwarks.
Yes.
What was the general reaction of the people that you worked with most closely?
Absolutely stunned just that it could happen.
State employees and university employees live in a, it's not the real world, and they don't, they're always shocked when these things happen more frequently in the real world.
And let's see, the office was, the president's office was still in the Koch building.
On Monday, because the next Monday,
Was he already gone from the office?
I don't know.
I think so.
I don't think he ever came back.
The only time I saw him, about six weeks later.
I was working late one night.
And he shows up up there to have some typing done.
and he's writing something and he came in and asked me if i'd come proof it for him and the typing that was being done and we're sitting there and waiting for typing and i'm proofing and back and forth and he looks me in the eye and said mary helen i didn't get a letter from you after i left office
And I said, Dr. Miller, I know you didn't.
And I said, I guess the reason was I didn't know what I'd say because I knew how hurt you must be.
And I guess that was okay.
I did get a call.
I got back to my office.
And everybody was so excited because Jerry Cooper from former students had been over trying to find a picture of Dr. Miller that we had in our files to put on the cover of the Texas Aggie the next month.
And I had asked them to gather up all their Dr. Miller pictures.
And I said, okay, you gather them up and you bring them to my office.
And I worried about it all night.
And I called Randy the next morning and I said, Randy, we're not going to provide you with a picture of Dr. Miller for the cover of the Texas Aggie.
And he said, why not?
And I said, because I have a sneaking suspicion I know what your cover would look like.
And I've heard some rumors, ideas that have been discussed.
And the truth of the matter is, I work for Texas A&M University and for the Board of Regents.
And I figure it'll take them about 30 seconds to figure out where you got the picture.
And they have every right to expect that I wouldn't.
And Randy said, Mary Helen, you're exactly right.
We never considered what position we were putting you in.
Don't worry about it.
They, I've forgotten what, they ended up running an old one they had of him, but they were highly, the association was highly critical of the board for firing Dr. Fuller.
He had far more support there than he had, I think, among faculty.
I don't think faculty, for the most part, disliked him, they just didn't know him.
Right, right.
In terms of politics, did during those years that you were part of the vice president's staff, did you have any real-world political task?
Occasionally.
With what politicians?
Mostly just making sure that they were treated well when they were on campus.
Helped put together a day-long meeting for Governor Clements right after he was elected and all of his staff.
That was also pretty funny because we had, it was in the summer and the governor had come out with his edict that all state buildings would be kept at temperature 78, all
Men, employees, would wear shirt sleeves, no coats and ties that summer, and the governor had good sense to say, and the ladies would know how to dress.
But when that meeting, we had a spy out at the airport.
We were not supposed to greet them at the airport.
This was a working meeting.
We had a spy out there to see if they got off the plane in shirt sleeves, and they did.
And so all of the guys had shown up over at the regent's quarters,
in short-sleeved white shirts and ties and coats.
So we hid the ties and coats in a closet and giggled about how much it had cost to pump hot water in there to get the temperature.
They had really worked hard to get the temperature up to 78 degrees on the chill water system.
Other political realities that you recall?
I recall putting together, I'm not sure what you're driving at here, but putting together a lot of information in support of various programs that we were working on.
I recall
writing, rewriting a lot of information other people had put together for it.
I'm not sure.
Well, I was thinking about receptions, parties coming.
Oh, yes.
Always.
Politicians coming to.
Coming and going and listening to them.
I mean, that's gone on always.
Of all those, regardless of where you were, where your task was, which political figures do you recall with greatest joy?
Which one?
Rick Perry.
Really?
As representative or as commissioner of agriculture?
As commissioner of agriculture.
Okay.
President Bush came here right before he left office as president, and he gave a major foreign policy speech in G. Raleigh White.
I had been told that the only people on the stage would be the president of the university, president of the student body, chairman of the MSC committee, and the president of the United States.
And we were going to put other politicians, Republican politicians, and most of them showed up in the reserve seat section.
We were going to introduce them.
They were going to have the spotlight on them, get a round of applause.
They all came out of the woodwork trying to get on stage.
I mean, senators, all of them did.
rick perry's office called wanting to know his secretary did or his aid if there's any way to get on stage and i said no i said i'm really sorry you'll be i went through the whole thing i'll be in the you know reserve seat section we'll be introduced get a round of applause i said commissioner's always greedy well and finally by our students i know it'll go well
And she said, she hung up.
A few minutes later, about a minute and a half later, the phone rang.
Miss Bowers, this is Rick Perry.
And I went through the whole thing with them.
He said, is there any way I can get on the stage?
I said, Rick, there's not a way in the world you can get on the stage that I'm aware of.
He said, Miss Bowers, he said, I'm going to try to go around you and get on that stage another way.
And I said, thank you for telling me.
I said, you're the only one that's had the courage to tell me.
And I feel sure that Senator Graham is and so-and-so is and so-and-so is, but at least you've...